["Toreador song - Aria of the hot spring
manners" playing in Italian]
[''Toreador Song - Aria
Of The Hot Spring Manners'' continues]
[music ends]
[horse trotting]
[man 1] Nothing like a hard drink
after a hard day's work.
-[lighthearted music]
-[man 2] Aw, come on, have another one.
[man 3] You there,
bring us another round of drinks.
[waitress] Coming.
Pwah!
So, you ready to spill what you
and the wife fought about this time?
I suppose.
-Dear, Lucius.
-What is it?
You've been working too hard lately,
my love,
why don't the two of us
take a little vacation together?
I can't. My schedule is full
for the next three months.
Fine! Do whatever you want!
[Livia sighs]
[door slams]
She gave me a shoulder
colder than Oculus winds after that.
I told her I'd take her out tomorrow,
so that cheered her up.
Hey, that's great, Lucius.
But if you two kids patched things up,
then why you so glum?
[Lucius] I can't waste time on leisure
when there is work to be done.
Come on!
A day off is gonna do you good.
Marcus is right.
You should take it easy, Lucius.
You know, I bet a woman or two
could help you with all that stress.
I don't believe I asked for such a thing.
-Hey!
-[waitress giggles]
What you think, gorgeous?
You want to help my buddy out?
[groans]
[Marcus] If you don't want her,
I'll take her for myself.
-[waitress] No way.
-[Marcus laughs]
Lucius Modestus.
Huh?
I have urgent business
with Lucius Modestus.
Architect of thermae, is Lucius present?
[man] Lucius Modestus, step forward.
Hm?
No need to shout. I am Lucius Modestus.
I see. I have a delivery for you
from consul Lepidus.
This parcel, to be precise.
What is this?
A letter from the consul himself.
He believes you can assist him with a very
pressing matter at his villa in Campania
and summons you posthaste.
We have prepared a horse for you.
You don't have to leave tonight
but the consul does request
that you depart Rome by tomorrow.
-What?
-You can consider yourself informed. Bye.
[gentle harp music]
-Tomorrow…
-[horse neighs]
You in trouble or something, Lucius?
What's up?
Trouble indeed.
Well, my wife…
She certainly won't be pleased
when she hears that
our plans have changed.
Oh my.
[Lucius] But if the consul himself
has summoned me,
then I cannot refuse his request.
For I am a Roman
and Romans must faithfully abide
by the laws of the empire
NEXT DAY
[man] Master Lucius Modestus,
we've been expecting you.
My name is Regulus
and I am a servant of this house.
Its a pleasure to meet you.
The master has been awaiting your arrival.
Right this way.
[groans softly]
[Regulus] Good tidings, consul.
It is I, Lucius Modestus.
So you're the famed thermae architect
I've heard so much about.
Thank you for travelling
such a long way to meet with me.
Of course.
Forgive me for summoning you like this
but there is an urgent favor
I need to ask of you.
What is it?
I would like you to build a bath outside
where I can soak for the rest of my days.
-[gentle music]
-Why outside?
Back when I was still able to stand
and move about,
I visited one of the splendid thermae
you designed in Rome.
[Lepidus] There she is!
It's Mount Vesuvius!
What a wonderfully novel idea,
to give the bathhouse guests
such a breathtaking view
in the form of a painting.
I was deeply impressed.
You honor me.
-Open the shutters and show him, Regulus.
-Sir.
Wait, could that be…
[soft uplifting music]
The real Mount Vesuvius in all her glory.
I spent the best days of my youth
in this villa
gazing out at that mountain.
[coughs]
And now here I am still gazing at her
as my time draws near.
I can feel my life is ending,
so I want to live out the rest of my days
doing what I love most.
I want to look upon that mountain
from the peaceful waters of a bath.
That is my greatest and final wish.
Do you think you can fulfill it, Lucius?
[gentle music ends]
[birds chirping]
Apologies for the rough terrain
but the master insists
that we leave the brush untamed.
Yes, well, it seems the consul's visit
to my bathhouse
planted some rather wild ideas
in his mind.
[Lucius]
What on earth could he be thinking?
There is no such thing
as an outdoor thermae.
[Regulus] Let's head past that tree.
There's a clear view
of the mountain over there.
Past that tree?
Yes.
[Lucius] Hmm. I see now.
The scenery here is spectacular.
No mere painting could ever do it justice.
No wonder the consul wants this
for his bathing area.
Were I building a swimming pool here,
I would simply construct a tub
and fill it with water.
But what's to be done
about the temperature?
Supplying the water
and then heating it as well
would be quite the undertaking.
Based on this villa's locale,
I assume that its water supply comes
from the Aqua Augusta, is that correct?
-That's right, it does.
-As I thought.
But I'm not sure why that matters. If
a water source is what you're looking for,
there's spring right over that way.
What? What the?
You've got a natural spring out here?
[upbeat music]
My, this is quite
the substantial water source indeed.
That's it, the water supply problem may
be resolved, but what of the temperature?
Hm? This water is warm..
What I've been told is that warm water
has been naturally occurring here
ever since Mount Vesuvius
erupted 50 years ago.
Suffice to say it's no ordinary water.
After all, there doesn't appear to be
any fish that are willing to live there.
[Lucius] Hm.
Master Lucius. What are you doing?
[water splashes]
-Don't go in there. It's dangerous.
-It seems to be getting hotter.
Is the groundwater
somehow rising to the surface?
By the gods,
I must find the source of this heat!
-[shouts]
-Master Lucius!
[groaning]
[Lucius]
Well, this is a surprisingly deep spring.
Is it possible
the heat is coming from the bottom?
Hm? What happened to the surface?
This water is strangely difficult
to see through.
I must find a way to use it in my bath.
[gasping]
Regulus! This water is incredible!
We can even use it
without purchasing slaves to heat the…
Uh.
Uh, Regulus?
Hmm?
[wind howling]
[suspenseful music]
[groans]
What are you hideous little satyrs?
Leave this place at once, away with you!
[monkeys grunt]
-[shrieking]
-[groaning]
[muffled groaning]
[clapping]
Alright! Everybody get out,
shoo, shoo, shoo!
[monkeys shrieking]
You like making trouble, do you,
troublemaker?
[gasping]
This bath is for monkeys only.
Didn't you read the sign?
Ah, it's a foreigner.
[Lucius] By the gods, his complexion!
This bath, monkey only.
This is monkey bath, you got it?
[Lucius] He must be one of the flat faces.
Get out this.
You go people bath now, okay?
[Lucius] I've done it!
Huh?
[Lucius] I've returned to that
advanced civilization once again.
[old man grunting]
[Lucius] But how in Jupiter's kingdom
did this happen?
I suppose the main event
that preceded it was that
I slipped and fell into the spring.
Is it possible that I am able to enter
this world by going underwater?
Alright, come on. Just follow me
and I'll take you over to the human bath.
[man chuckles]
-[woman] Funny stuff.
-[man 1] Good times.
[Lucius] It seems the flat-faced folk
bathe in this area as well.
You okay?
So that bath over there must be designated
for those simian looking creatures.
Outdoor baths would be the height
of novelty and luxury in Rome
and yet here, they appear to be as
commonplace as lacing one's sandals.
Even the animals here
are accustomed to such advanced comforts.
How can this be?
Focus, Modestus,
this is no time to ponder.
I must absorb as many
of these bathing practices
as I can before I am whisked back to Rome.
[gasps]
Hey you, where do you think you're going?
You need clothes.
You gotta cover up your business.
Business?
Oh, geez. Just wait here a second,
I'll find you some.
[Lucius] Hmm.
Okay, I'm gonna let you borrow this
but you better return it to me.
Oh boy. This is worse than I thought.
You need help getting dressed?
[Lucius] What a peculiar development.
It seems this flat-faced fellow
is unaccustomed to nudity.
But how did he acquire such
luxurious linens to fashion this toga?
I'm sure it'll feel wonderful
on my hot body.
Oh, man.
Hey! What are you doing? Stop!
[lighthearted music]
[Lucius] A flat-faced tribe
whose pursuit of pleasure
rivals even that of the Romans.
It is my duty to educate myself on their
culture and bring it back to the empire!
Oh, check out this Greek statue.
Think we ought to call him David?
[chuckles] You can try.
I can't tell if he's just a tourist
or if he escaped an art museum.
[Lucius] Such a picturesque fountain of
rejuvenation tucked away in the mountains.
The aesthetics of this place
would put Polyclitis himself to shame.
And their sense of freedom, I feel,
is overwhelming.
Surely this feeling cannot be replicated
in a manmade thermae surrounded by walls.
At first glance,
I confess that as a man of Rome,
I found these people rather vulgar.
But I cannot look down on them.
Nor can I remain clothed here
for one more instant.
[woman] Oh, look, he's getting in.
[man] Careful, big guy,
looking a little wobbly there.
[gentle music]
Hmm.
[Lucius]
What manner of contraption is that?
Fascinating.
This wooden pipe must redirect
the hot groundwater
to this caldarium.
The mechanism itself is quite primitive,
but…
Wait.
How on earth do they drain the water?
This phenomenon begs to be researched.
Oh, look at him go. I think it might be
his first open-air bath.
Might be.
I guess he's a hot spring spring chicken.
It all makes sense now.
They're draining the water into the river!
Unlike these flat faces,
we Romans have failed to face
where our customs fall flat.
While we have clung to our outdated
aqueducts and massive conduits,
these people have harnessed
the simple power of crude technology
to create this gorgeous,
brilliant outdoor bath!
Should we help him?
It doesn't look like he's doing so hot.
Hundred yen says he passes out.
[Lucius] No, I must not succumb to envy
nor can I waver in my resolve!
I have been chosen to study this culture
and use it to build the Rome of tomorrow!
My gods! What is that?
Some sort of woven basket on a stick.
And are these eggs?
[chuckles] Looks like our tourist pal
found the hot spring eggs, huh?
Well, let's let him try one.
Yoo-hoo, Mr. Foreigner.
Crack that egg right in here.
-Hm?
-Come on, give it a crack.
Here's the bowl.
What are you, waiting for it to hatch?
Give it. Like this.
There you go, buddy, one hot spring egg.
It's an old Japanese classic, like me, ha!
Is he telling me to eat this?
Go ahead, eat up, sonny.
I promise you're gonna love it.
An egg that's been boiled
using the heat of the bathwater.
[sniffs]
Well, it doesn't seem to be poisoned.
[Lucius shouts] Delectable!
What is this ambrosial texture?
-[lively upbeat music]
-It's so silky and smooth!
Nowhere in the entire Roman empire
could one find such a sumptuous
soft-boiled snack!
Look at you gulping down the whole thing
in one go. [chuckles]
While you're at it, why don't you
wash that down with some sake?
[man 1] This is the only way to get the
complete Japanese hot spring experience.
Slam it down. Go on, we don't touch.
[sniffs] A tiny drink.
It has a strong odor of fermentation.
Don't look at me like I poured you
an arsenic cocktail, just drink it.
[grunts softly]
[Lucius] Amazing!
And it complements the egg so well!
Wow, look how happy he is,
all liquored up.
He sure is. [chuckles]
And there's a lot more
where that came from, buddy.
You just slam down another
one and enjoy yourself.
[Lucius]
Until now as a Roman, I truly believed
that I had experienced every single bock
of alien pleasure this world had to offer.
But I was woefully incorrect.
[man 1] You know, being a guy who looks
like you around here is pretty rare.
[woman]
Rare indeed. He's so rugged and manly,
you could cut glass with that jaw.
[man chuckles]
What's the matter?
You can't keep up with us old folks?
[man 1 chuckles]
Look at him, he's dozing off.
[Lucius] Oh gods,
what a terrible mistake I've made.
I'm starting to lose control of my senses.
I cannot afford to lose my balance here.
A Roman must always
keep his wits about him…
Here you go, dearie,
have yourself another egg.
Don't be shy now.
[groaning softly]
Oh my, a handsome young foreigner
is ogling my gazongas.
I feel like I'm 50 years younger.
[laughs] He probably just figured out
you're a woman.
[Lucius] If there's one thing that's clear
it's that these people have an aesthetic
sense that rivals even that of us Romans.
There's no limit to what we could learn
from their innovations.
Perhaps I should study abroad
in this country.
-But after a quick nap.
-Sorry, Sorry, darling, you couldn't…
-[lighthearted music fades]
-[laughter fades away]
[Regulus] Master Lucius.
Master Lucius, wake up!
Are you alright?
What happened to you down there?
[groaning]
Move slowly, sir. Are you certain
you should be sitting up like that?
[Lucius] Once again, it ended as abruptly
as it began.
-[shouting] Regulus!
-Yes?
We must begin construction
of the outdoor bathhouse immediately!
Uh, yes, sir.
Then let us strike while the iron is hot.
A WHILE LATER
[gentle music]
So, has Consul Lepidus's condition
seen any improvements?
Yes, it's like a miracle.
After you built the outdoor bath for him,
he started using it daily and now he has
completely recovered from his ailments.
He was profoundly impressed
by your genius, Master Lucius,
you should be proud. I think you just
might have saved the master's life.
[Lucius] If only he knew the truth.
What I created was but an imitation
of that world's design.
Lucius, my friend! There you are!
Come on in! The water's fine!
No, Consul, could that really be you?
[laughs]
I was so certain I would die in this bath
but instead I found myself a wife
and had another child.
I owe my life to you, Lucius, truly.
You and this marvelous outdoor bath
you built
has done things I never thought possible.
I… I am very glad to hear it, sir, but…
[Lucius]
How could a bath alone have this effect?
The suggestions you gave me
have done wonders.
I started drinking warm wine
and eating these excellent eggs
in the bath every day.
[chuckles]
As for why I called you here today,
there's something that
I'm concerned about.
Oh, and what troubles you, sir?
Well, it's that guy.
-[tense music]
-[gasps]
He seems like a peaceful little fellow,
so he's not a bother.
Lucius,
would you have any idea what he is?
Oh, no. None at all, what do you mean?
[nervous laughter]
Well, then I suppose
I'll just leave him be.
[Lucius] That creature…
How is it going to get back home?
[male narrator]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Author Ms. Mari Yamazaki
embarked on a journey to rediscover
Japan's bathing culture.
[grandiose opera music]
Hot springs are known
for the onsen tamago.
In the anime,
Lucius was impressed when he ate it.
I want to try eating it too.
Onsen tamago.
Hello.
-Hello.
KUSATSU GARASU ZO
-Thank you for helping us today.
-My pleasure.
-[gentle percussive music]
-I'm here to try the onsen tamago.
You're making a lot of them.
Yes.
These eggs are first cooked
for 12 minutes in a water
that is 80 degrees Celsius.
Then it's placed in this hot spring
for two hours to keep warm.
-A lot of work goes into these eggs.
-Yes.
It adds a little flavor of the hot spring.
-It gives it that flavor?
-Yes.
Flavor of the hot spring?
[male narrator] Onsen tamago
is an egg that is cooked for a long time
in water that is 70 to 80 degrees.
Taking advantage of the fact that
the egg white and yolk
cook at different rates,
the hard-boiled egg, soft-boiled egg,
and onsen tamago each provide
a different texture.
-May I try one?
-Yes.
Please take one.
Which one should I choose?
I'll take this one.
-[gentle music]
-I'll crack it.
I'm going to crack it open.
-That looks good.
-[woman] Please put this broth in it.
Lovely.
-I'll give it a try.
-Yes, please.
I guess I can kind of
taste the hot spring flavor.
It's very good.
It's good, but I really like the texture.
It makes me want rice with it.
I want to eat this with white rice.
-Sorry, we don't have any rice prepared.
-No worries.
-[soft shamisen music]
-[narrator] Thermae memory.
She sketched a memorable moment
from this trip.
How did this trip appear
in Ms. Yamazaki's eyes?
THIS KIND OF TEXTURE
DOESN'T EXIST IN ROME!
I don't know how to express it,
but this is how I really felt.
I don't think you can find this
particular texture elsewhere.
Lucius will now return to Rome
and introduce these eggs
that have a special texture.
I think it will go well
with Italian cuisine.
I think Romans would like these things.
They love gourmet food.
So they love new textures
and things like that.
This will become popular for sure.
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Ms. Yamazaki's journey will continue,
as she searches for more hot springs.
["Toreador song - Aria of the hot spring
manners" playing in Italian]
[music ends]